hi everyone my name is Dr eatonson
welcome to heal NPD so my last video
blew up a little bit and it brought a
lot more viewers to my channel and
overall I think that's a good thing
because I want this channel to grow and
to reach as wide an audience as possible
but with the new viewership came uh lots
of comments that were negative paranoid
and some that were downright abusive I
spent a lot of time over the last couple
of weeks combing through the comments
and responding to all the ones that I
felt were in good faith I of course
deleted the ones that I felt were
abusive toward me or toward people with
NPD I don't tolerate abusive comments
toward any individual or group on my
channel
so today I'd like to discuss one of the
main themes that I noticed emerging in
the comments section of my last video
and it's the question of whether people
with NPD are aware of the harm that's
caused by their actions
[Music]
so I noticed several main themes when
reading the comments of my last video
some like the idea that narcissists are
evil demons from hell don't Merit
serious time or consideration I'm not
interested in discussing the
supernatural here I think about mental
illness in terms of psychology not
ghosts and goblins but other comments I
feel reflected the widespread confusion
and misunderstanding surrounding this
disorder here's a brief sampling
they're victims of Early Childhood
trauma but they chose the wrong path and
they dehumanize themselves by becoming a
false being
The Narcissist grew up with manipulation
they'll get close to someone just to use
and Destroy them love is viewed as a way
to get stupid people to do what you want
they're not victims on the contrary
they're fully aware of what they're
doing
they're not traumatized at all they
enjoy torturing you
now here we have four people who seem to
believe that they have the one true
understanding of narcissism yet the
first two comments say that narcissism
is the result of early trauma and
manipulation while the second two say
the opposite that there's no trauma
history for narcissists whatsoever and
this is kind of a major issue and it
serves to illustrate how many people out
there think they know what narcissism is
when they really have no idea
but despite their differences each of
the comments I just cited subscribes to
the idea that narcissists are aware of
the harm that their actions cause to
those around them and this was a very
common sentiment I believe it's fueled
by videos like the one from Dr Romani
that I referenced in my last video that
lead people to believe that as a general
rule narcissists are intentional Bad
actors that they make calculated
decisions to hurt or harm other people
for their own benefit or Amusement to
quote the comments they'll get close to
someone just to use and Destroy them
they're fully aware of what they're
doing they enjoy torturing you
now I don't know this for sure but I
imagine that many of these same
commenters would actually agree that
narcissism is a mental illness
if that's the case then they don't seem
to really understand what that term
means mental illness isn't just some
label to describe aberrant Behavior it
influences thoughts feelings and
perceptions
in many ways having a mental illness and
being fully aware of what you're doing
are mutually incompatible propositions
and that's because mental illness skews
how we see ourselves and how we see
other people it changes what we can be
quote aware of
it causes us to rely on a limited set of
inflexible coping strategies and it
makes it difficult to learn and adapt to
new information
due to their mental illness narcissists
are frequently unaware of how other
people really see them they may believe
that other people are idealizing them
when in fact other people are really
rolling their eyes at them or they may
believe that other people hate and
despise them when in reality most people
aren't even noticing them
distorted self-image skews their
perception of circumstances and of
relationships they may perceive
competition or threat where none
actually exists they may be prone to
intense feelings of rage and resentment
in response to minor slights that most
of us wouldn't even notice
the wrong look or tone of voice can
magically represent a major insult or
injury to someone with NPD they may
think your mortal enemies because of
something you said absent-mindedly at a
party three years ago that you don't
even remember but that just so happened
to intersect with that individual's
fragile self-esteem in such a way that
they've been ruminating about it ever
since
they may have engaged in hundreds of
hours of fantasy fights and arguments
with you the thing you said that you
probably don't even remember saying may
be a centerpiece a fragile self-esteem
that haunts that individual late into
the night and around which they've
rallied considerable internal resources
the world can be a terrifying
claustrophobic zero-sum place when
viewed through the Kaleidoscope of
distorted self-perception that is common
in NPD
mental illness also makes individuals
with NPD more reactive and more
impulsive while someone without mental
illness may have the internal space to
consider multiple interpretations of an
event and to consider multiple ways of
responding before deciding on a course
of action
someone with NPD or pathological
narcissism may not be able to think
about alternative responses they may
simply Act
often in cluster B disorders one of the
main functions of behavior is simply to
expel unwanted thoughts and feelings
that the fragile self-structure can't
contain
people around them may have the
experience of being a human Dumping
Ground and that's because to a certain
extent they are The Fragile self of
someone with pathological narcissism or
NPD typically can't tolerate certain
thoughts and feelings and it must
evacuate them and this evacuation often
takes the form of projection acting out
or impulsive destructive or
self-destructive behaviors
now sometimes these are premeditated
decisions but often they aren't often
they're more like reflexes
one of the main approaches in treating
NPD is called mentalization-based
therapy this approach is focused on
helping the individuals to develop more
sophisticated models of their own mind
and of the minds of other people it
helps them to create more space to think
about why they feel a certain way
because there's a natural deficit in the
ability to think about thoughts and the
ability to model the self and other
people in NPD another popular treatment
is called transference focused
Psychotherapy and that involves helping
the individual with NPD to become more
aware of the ways that they misperceive
interpersonal situations
like anyone individuals with
pathological narcissism and NPD act
according to their perceptions
can we really say that someone quote
knows what they're doing when their
underlying perception of events is badly
distorted and given the internal
discontinuity that's common in cluster B
personality disorders like NPD
perceptions can shift dramatically over
short periods of time
someone who was idealized is now
devalued someone who was loved is now
hated someone who was a friend is now an
enemy
Etc these shifts are often sudden and
Global they occur with little to no
warning and with little to no awareness
on the part of the person with NPD
everyone around them is aware of these
shifts and they're often shocked and
confused by them this is actually a
major principle in the treatment of
personality disorders like NPD and BPD
the patient may treat you like a savior
one week and like a threat to their very
existence the next week with little to
no awareness of that disparity this
phenomenon is called splitting and it's
very well documented in personality
disordered individuals
what most people don't understand about
splitting though is that it changes
perception of the present moment and
also of History it's not just that
you're suddenly bad in the narcissistic
individual's eyes it's also that
suddenly you were always bad
everything you've ever done is suddenly
perceived through this new lens of
Badness
the global shift in perception causes
people with pathological narcissism and
NPD to behave in incredibly inconsistent
ways but to someone who doesn't
understand splitting it might seem like
the narcissist is just incredibly
hypocritical or that they were just
using them all along lying and deceiving
them at every turn but in reality it's
often the case that the narcissist's
entire perception has shifted due to
internal events that are beyond their
own awareness
now it can be difficult and confusing
for laypersons to understand what mental
illness looks like when it presents as
NPD and that's because most narcissists
aren't bouncing off the walls they don't
usually present in a way that quote
looks like mental illness they typically
look put together they're often Charming
charismatic gregarious they may be the
life of the party or the leader of a
community
but they can also come completely undone
in the right circumstances and if you
look at the person's relationship
history you'll typically see a blighted
hellscape of broken relationships burned
Bridges seething resentments and
emotional pain
if you get them talking about themselves
in a deeper way you'll quickly come up
against glaring limitations in insight
and self-awareness and if you push past
the superficial charm you'll find
someone who's often profoundly confused
about life and about human relationships
and this is what it means to say that
narcissism is a mental illness the
person's ability to understand their own
behavior is often compromised their
perceptions are often distorted the
sense they make from interactions and
from relationships is often nonsensical
but they can't see it
the grandiosity and periods of inflated
self-esteem that occur in NPD can cause
the person to feel temporarily proud of
horrible Behavior to justify and
rationalize insensitive or abusive
treatment of other people again this is
often a matter of seeing the world and
one's own choices through a distorted
lens
now you can say that they know what
they're doing
phrase kind of loses all meaning once we
look at the distortions and
self-perception inherent in the mental
illness of NPD now you should absolutely
100 percent not tolerate abusive
behavior from anyone in your life
you should absolutely learn all you can
about this disorder if you feel it's
negatively impacted your life or your
relationships learn to set adaptive
boundaries learn to behave assertively
and to communicate effectively if you
have doubts about whether or not you
deserve good treatment from other people
take a look at those doubts with the
help of a licensed mental health
professional I have no problem with
people taking their emotional and mental
health seriously sometimes the answer is
to cut problematic relationships out of
your life as a teacher of mine once said
sometimes the most compassionate thing
you can do is say no but should you
spend every waking minute in distorted
Echo chambers that amplify your pain and
resentment while promoting models of
narcissism that are only Loosely based
in actual fact
no I don't think you should I don't
think that's necessary or helpful
if you've gotten to the point where you
earnestly believe that people with NPD
are demons from hell or sadistic
Predators who enjoy torturing other
people for their own amusement or that
they're representative of a new species
of human that preys on the rest of us
then I'm sorry to say I think you've
gone down an unhelpful path
if you've gotten to the point where you
react with moral outrage to the moderate
reasonable perspective that people with
mental illness are mentally ill then you
need to spend less time in polarizing
internet forums
and if you can't tolerate hearing that
someone with narcissism or NPD is
suffering then you need to take a step
back from this issue because you're
becoming radicalized the reality of NPD
is often the opposite of sensational
narcissists are not happy
they often feel empty inside their lives
are frequently a never-ending cycle of
repetitive maladaptive patterns of which
they're only vaguely aware I've met so
many individuals who spend their lives
searching over and over again for a
temporary hit of self-esteem that they
always think will magically solve their
problems but never actually does
real NPD is a frustrating tangle of
contradictory perceptions faulty
attributions and developmentally fixated
interpersonal strategies all of those
images online of beautiful people with
evil eyes pulling off a mask surrounded
by mystery and smoke that's not NPD and
if you think it is then you're mistaken
and I invite you to spend more time on
this channel and others like it that
present a realistic grounded moderate
and decidedly depolarized perspective on
the mental illness of pathological
narcissism and NPD
okay so that's it for today as always
please leave comments questions and
suggestions for future episodes down
below and until next time take good care
[Music]